README.md, before:

# HTTPie Auth Store

> [!NOTE]
>
> The plugin was renamed from `httpie-credential-store` to `httpie-auth-store`
> primarily due to backward incompatible changes and because the new name
> better reflects its nature.

HTTPie Auth Store is an [HTTPie] authentication plugin that automatically
selects the appropriate authentication type and payload from a file containing
authentication bindings, then uses them for the current request. No more
memorizing or searching for tokens, usernames, or passwords — simply add them
to the authentication store, and the plugin handles the rest. This plugin also
supports various secret storage options, such as system keychains and password
managers (see supported [Secret providers]).

Eager to get started? Just start with installing!

```sh
httpie cli plugins install httpie-auth-store
```

or via `pip` in the same python environment where HTTPie is installed:

```sh
python3 -m pip install httpie-auth-store
```


## Table of Content

* [Usage](#usage)
* [Authentication types](#authentication-types)
  * [basic](#basic)
  * [digest](#digest)
  * [bearer](#bearer)
  * [header](#header)
  * [composite](#composite)
  * [hmac](#hmac)
* [Secret providers](#secret-providers)
  * [sh](#sh)
  * [system](#system)
  * [password-store](#password-store)
* [FAQ](#faq)


## Usage

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Do not forget to pass `-A store` or `--auth-type store` to HTTPie in order to
> activate the plugin.

Once installed, the plugin looks for `auth_store.json` located in the HTTPie
configuration directory. On macOS and Linux, it tries the following locations:
`$HTTPIE_CONFIG_DIR/auth_store.json`, `$HOME/.httpie/auth_store.json` and
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/httpie/auth_store.json`; on Windows —
`%HTTPIE_CONFIG_DIR%\auth_store.json` and `%APPDATA%\httpie\auth_store.json`

> [!NOTE]
>
> The authentication store is not created automatically; it is the user's
> responsibility to create one.

The authentication store is a JSON file that contains two sections: `bindings`
and `secrets`:

```json
{
  "bindings": [
    {
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "$GITHUB_TOKEN",
      "resources": ["https://api.github.com/"]
    },
    {
      "id": "bots",
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "ZWFzdGVyIGVnZwo",
      "resources": ["https://api.github.com/"]
    },
  ],
  "secrets": {
    "GITHUB_TOKEN": {
      "provider": "system",
      "service": "github.com",
      "username": "ikalnytskyi"
    }
  }
}
```

Each _binding_ is a JSON object that contains the following keys:

* `id` (*str*, *optional*) is an authentication binding ID that can be used to
  overcome ambiguity when two or more bindings are matched.

* `auth_type` (*str*, *required*) is an authentication type supported by HTTPie,
  either natively or via third-party plugins. See [Authentication types] for
  details.

* `auth` (*str*, *optional*) is an authentication payload for the given
  authentication type. Required for certain authentication types, optional for
  others. Tokens started with `$` are replaced with secrets referred by those
  tokens. The `$` sign must be escaped (`$$`) to remain untouched.

* `resources` (*List\[str\]*, *required*) is an array of URLs to activate this
  binding for. Must contain both scheme and hostname.

Each _secret_ is a KV-pair, where key is a secret name, and value is either a
secret itself or a JSON object that specified how a secret must be retrieved
from secure storage. The JSON object must contain the `provider` key. Presence
of other keys are provider dependent (see [Secret providers] section below).

Once the authenticate store is set up, just pass `-A store` to HTTPie to
activate the plugin and perform some magic for you.

```sh
http -A store https://api.github.com
```

If there are two or more authentication bingind in the store that match the
same resource, you can select appropriate binding by providing a binding ID by
passing `-a` or `--auth` to HTTPie. This might come handy when you have
multiple accounts on the same web resource.

```sh
http -A store -a bots https://api.github.com
```


## Authentication types

HTTPie Auth Store supports both built-in and third-party HTTPie authentication
types as well as provides few authentication types on its own.

> [!TIP]
>
> It's advised to store your secrets in password managers instead of storing
> them directly in the authentication store file.

### basic

The 'Basic' HTTP authentication type as defined in RFC 7617. Transmits
credentials as username/password pairs, encoded using Base64.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "basic",
  "auth": "ihor:p@ss"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited username/password pair

### digest

The 'Digest' HTTP authentication type as defined in RFC 2617. It applies a hash
function to the username and password before sending them over the network.


```json
{
  "auth_type": "digest",
  "auth": "ihor:p@ss"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited username/password pair

### bearer

The 'Bearer' HTTP authentication type transmits token in the `Authorization`
HTTP header.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "bearer",
  "auth": "t0ken"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a bearer token to authenticate with

### header

The 'Header' authentication type is not exactly an authentication scheme. It's
rather a way to set a free-formed HTTP header that may or may not contain any
secret material.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "header",
  "auth": "X-Secret:s3cret"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited HTTP header name/value pair

The 'Header' authentication type can be used to bypass any kind of limitations
imposed by built-in or third-party authentication types. For instance, you can
pass a bearer token with non-default authentication scheme, say `JWT`, without
breaking a sweat.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "header",
  "auth": "Authorization:JWT t0ken"
}
```

### composite

The 'Composite' authentication type is a not an authentication type either.
It's a way to use multiple authentication types simultaneously. It might come
handy when in addition to `basic` or `bearer` authentication, you have to
supply an extra secret via custom HTTP header.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "composite",
  "auth": [
    {
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "t0ken"
    },
    {
      "auth_type": "header",
      "auth": "X-Secret:s3cret"
    }
  ]
}
```

where

* `auth` is a list of authentication entries, as supported by HTTPie

### hmac

The 'HMAC' authentication type is not built-in and requires the `httpie-hmac`
plugin to be installed first. Its only purpose here is to serve as an example
of how to use a third-party authentication type in the authentication store.

```json
{
 "auth_type": "hmac",
 "auth": "secret:czNjcjN0Cg=="
}
```

where

* `auth` is a HMAC specific authentication payload


## Secret providers

The plugin supports some secret providers that can be used to retrieve tokens,
passwords and other secret materials from various secured storages.

### sh

The 'Sh' secret provider retrieves a secret from the standard output of the
shell script. This is a universal approach that can be used to retrieve secrets
from unsupported password managers using their command line interfaces.

```json
{
  "provider": "sh",
  "script": "cat ~/path/to/secret | tr -d '\n'"
}
```

where

* `script` is a shell script to execute

### system

The 'System' secret provider, as the name suggests, retrieves a secret from
your system keychain. It may be KWallet, GNOME Keyring, macOS Keychain or even
Windows Credential Locker.

```json
{
  "provider": "system",
  "service": "github",
  "username": "ikalnytskyi"
}
```

where

* `service` is a service to retrieve a secret from
* `username` is a username to retrieve a secret from

### password-store

The 'Password Store' secret provider invokes the `pass` executable on your
system, and retrieves the secret from the first line of referred record.

```json
{
  "provider": "password-store",
  "name": "github.com/ikalnytskyi"
}
```

where

* `name` is a password-store entry name to retrieve a secret from

## FAQ

* **Q**: How to get know what authentication is used for the given request?

  **A**: You can run HTTPie with `--offline` argument to print the request
  header along with injected authentication credentials.


[HTTPie]: https://httpie.org/
[Authentication types]: #authentication-types
[Secret providers]: #secret-providers
[password-store]: https://www.passwordstore.org/

Commit message:

Autocreate the auth store when missing
In order to ease managing of auth entries and give some examples to end
users, instead of asking them to create the auth store themselves, we
better create one automatically.

README.md, after:

# HTTPie Auth Store

> [!NOTE]
>
> The plugin was renamed from `httpie-credential-store` to `httpie-auth-store`
> primarily due to backward incompatible changes and because the new name
> better reflects its nature.

HTTPie Auth Store is an [HTTPie] authentication plugin that automatically
selects the appropriate authentication type and payload from a file containing
authentication bindings, then uses them for the current request. No more
memorizing or searching for tokens, usernames, or passwords — simply add them
to the authentication store, and the plugin handles the rest. This plugin also
supports various secret storage options, such as system keychains and password
managers (see supported [Secret providers]).

Eager to get started? Just start with installing!

```sh
httpie cli plugins install httpie-auth-store
```

or via `pip` in the same python environment where HTTPie is installed:

```sh
python3 -m pip install httpie-auth-store
```


## Table of Content

* [Usage](#usage)
* [Authentication types](#authentication-types)
  * [basic](#basic)
  * [digest](#digest)
  * [bearer](#bearer)
  * [header](#header)
  * [composite](#composite)
  * [hmac](#hmac)
* [Secret providers](#secret-providers)
  * [sh](#sh)
  * [system](#system)
  * [password-store](#password-store)
* [FAQ](#faq)


## Usage

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Do not forget to pass `-A store` or `--auth-type store` to HTTPie in order to
> activate the plugin.

Once installed, the plugin looks for `auth_store.json` located in the HTTPie
configuration directory. On macOS and Linux, it tries the following locations:
`$HTTPIE_CONFIG_DIR/auth_store.json`, `$HOME/.httpie/auth_store.json` and
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/httpie/auth_store.json`; on Windows —
`%HTTPIE_CONFIG_DIR%\auth_store.json` and `%APPDATA%\httpie\auth_store.json`

> [!NOTE]
>
> The authentication store can be automatically created with few examples
> inside on first plugin activation, e.g. `http -A store https://pie.dev`.

The authentication store is a JSON file that contains two sections: `bindings`
and `secrets`:

```json
{
  "bindings": [
    {
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "$GITHUB_TOKEN",
      "resources": ["https://api.github.com/"]
    },
    {
      "id": "bots",
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "ZWFzdGVyIGVnZwo",
      "resources": ["https://api.github.com/"]
    },
  ],
  "secrets": {
    "GITHUB_TOKEN": {
      "provider": "system",
      "service": "github.com",
      "username": "ikalnytskyi"
    }
  }
}
```

Each _binding_ is a JSON object that contains the following keys:

* `id` (*str*, *optional*) is an authentication binding ID that can be used to
  overcome ambiguity when two or more bindings are matched.

* `auth_type` (*str*, *required*) is an authentication type supported by HTTPie,
  either natively or via third-party plugins. See [Authentication types] for
  details.

* `auth` (*str*, *optional*) is an authentication payload for the given
  authentication type. Required for certain authentication types, optional for
  others. Tokens started with `$` are replaced with secrets referred by those
  tokens. The `$` sign must be escaped (`$$`) to remain untouched.

* `resources` (*List\[str\]*, *required*) is an array of URLs to activate this
  binding for. Must contain both scheme and hostname.

Each _secret_ is a KV-pair, where key is a secret name, and value is either a
secret itself or a JSON object that specified how a secret must be retrieved
from secure storage. The JSON object must contain the `provider` key. Presence
of other keys are provider dependent (see [Secret providers] section below).

Once the authenticate store is set up, just pass `-A store` to HTTPie to
activate the plugin and perform some magic for you.

```sh
http -A store https://api.github.com
```

If there are two or more authentication bingind in the store that match the
same resource, you can select appropriate binding by providing a binding ID by
passing `-a` or `--auth` to HTTPie. This might come handy when you have
multiple accounts on the same web resource.

```sh
http -A store -a bots https://api.github.com
```


## Authentication types

HTTPie Auth Store supports both built-in and third-party HTTPie authentication
types as well as provides few authentication types on its own.

> [!TIP]
>
> It's advised to store your secrets in password managers instead of storing
> them directly in the authentication store file.

### basic

The 'Basic' HTTP authentication type as defined in RFC 7617. Transmits
credentials as username/password pairs, encoded using Base64.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "basic",
  "auth": "ihor:p@ss"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited username/password pair

### digest

The 'Digest' HTTP authentication type as defined in RFC 2617. It applies a hash
function to the username and password before sending them over the network.


```json
{
  "auth_type": "digest",
  "auth": "ihor:p@ss"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited username/password pair

### bearer

The 'Bearer' HTTP authentication type transmits token in the `Authorization`
HTTP header.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "bearer",
  "auth": "t0ken"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a bearer token to authenticate with

### header

The 'Header' authentication type is not exactly an authentication scheme. It's
rather a way to set a free-formed HTTP header that may or may not contain any
secret material.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "header",
  "auth": "X-Secret:s3cret"
}
```

where

* `auth` is a `:`-delimited HTTP header name/value pair

The 'Header' authentication type can be used to bypass any kind of limitations
imposed by built-in or third-party authentication types. For instance, you can
pass a bearer token with non-default authentication scheme, say `JWT`, without
breaking a sweat.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "header",
  "auth": "Authorization:JWT t0ken"
}
```

### composite

The 'Composite' authentication type is a not an authentication type either.
It's a way to use multiple authentication types simultaneously. It might come
handy when in addition to `basic` or `bearer` authentication, you have to
supply an extra secret via custom HTTP header.

```json
{
  "auth_type": "composite",
  "auth": [
    {
      "auth_type": "bearer",
      "auth": "t0ken"
    },
    {
      "auth_type": "header",
      "auth": "X-Secret:s3cret"
    }
  ]
}
```

where

* `auth` is a list of authentication entries, as supported by HTTPie

### hmac

The 'HMAC' authentication type is not built-in and requires the `httpie-hmac`
plugin to be installed first. Its only purpose here is to serve as an example
of how to use a third-party authentication type in the authentication store.

```json
{
 "auth_type": "hmac",
 "auth": "secret:czNjcjN0Cg=="
}
```

where

* `auth` is a HMAC specific authentication payload


## Secret providers

The plugin supports some secret providers that can be used to retrieve tokens,
passwords and other secret materials from various secured storages.

### sh

The 'Sh' secret provider retrieves a secret from the standard output of the
shell script. This is a universal approach that can be used to retrieve secrets
from unsupported password managers using their command line interfaces.

```json
{
  "provider": "sh",
  "script": "cat ~/path/to/secret | tr -d '\n'"
}
```

where

* `script` is a shell script to execute

### system

The 'System' secret provider, as the name suggests, retrieves a secret from
your system keychain. It may be KWallet, GNOME Keyring, macOS Keychain or even
Windows Credential Locker.

```json
{
  "provider": "system",
  "service": "github",
  "username": "ikalnytskyi"
}
```

where

* `service` is a service to retrieve a secret from
* `username` is a username to retrieve a secret from

### password-store

The 'Password Store' secret provider invokes the `pass` executable on your
system, and retrieves the secret from the first line of referred record.

```json
{
  "provider": "password-store",
  "name": "github.com/ikalnytskyi"
}
```

where

* `name` is a password-store entry name to retrieve a secret from

## FAQ

* **Q**: How to get know what authentication is used for the given request?

  **A**: You can run HTTPie with `--offline` argument to print the request
  header along with injected authentication credentials.


[HTTPie]: https://httpie.org/
[Authentication types]: #authentication-types
[Secret providers]: #secret-providers
[password-store]: https://www.passwordstore.org/
